---
layout: post
title: rystsov::Nidaba
name: Nidaba
tags: ["pet"]
desc: "A distributed scalable PKI"
---

<h1>Nidaba</h1>

Nidaba is a distributed scalable public key infrastructure that can be used as a DNS, a authentication system or a certificate authority.

Some time ago I asked myself how the way we do software would change if each user had a private server. I was thinking about this for a while and came to the idea that a distributed authentication is vital for such realty.

I digged and realised that neither Namecoin nor Twister provide important properties, such as protection from cyber squatters & vandals, resistance to the tragedy of the commons and scalability.

I decided to design a system that doesn't have these disadvantages. This is how Nidaba was born.

Besides the mentioned properties Nidaba provides a stable price for certificate operations on the external markets via the supply and demand model.

All notable details about the architecture I described in [the Nidaba whitepaper](http://nidaba-pki.org/files/nidaba.pdf). Here I want to highlight an interesting analogy and to justify the name of the project.

<h2>Why I choose Nidaba to be the name</h2>

There is a classic analogy between gold and Bitcoin. We can imagine the active nodes of the Bitcoin network as the miners which mine the same gold-field. The field was rich at the beginning of mining but it becomes unproductive with time. As you see there is a limited amount of <s>gold</s> bitcoins.

With Nidaba there is another analogy. The internal currency is a crop and the active nodes are farmers. The internal currency may rot just like a crop. Also the supply of the crop/internal currency can be raised at any time if more people become farmers/active nodes, but this would drop the price for the crop/currency on the market and the inefficiency farmers/active nodes give up farming/supporting the network.

Nidaba is the Sumerian goddess of writing and harvest. Both this activities match the ideas behind the system. Blockchain keeps all the system's history and [the history](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Recorded_history) itself begins with the invention of writing. The link between the distributed PKI and a harvest I highlighted in the previous paragraph.